modules/pipelines/data_access/README.md, before:

# Data Access

Here is where we house libraries that handle the reading and writing of data. For now we are merely just reading from jpeg files. However,
we will moved onto support for networking interfaces.

# Python Bindings

Although this library is written in Rust we have the ability to use it in Python. This is done by using the `pyo3` crate. We can install
the library using a `pip install` and pointing to the directory of this readme file. Once the library is installed we can use it in the
following way:

```python
from data_access_layer.data_access_layer import read_rgb_image


def main():
    height = 480
    width = 853
    data = read_rgb_image("./assets/test.jpg", width, height)
    print(f"\n\nThe image has {len(data)} pixels\n\n")
```

# Image Loading

This library handles the reading of jpeg files. It is a simple library that is used to read in the jpeg files and convert them
to a stream of bytes. The loading and conversion of the jpeg files is done in the `data_access/basic/src/images.rs`.
For our images we are handling data in the following outline: 

<p align="center">
  <img src="static/Image_plane.jpg" alt="Alt text" style="width:480px; height:400px;">
</p>

Here we can see that we have three layers of a frame. Each layer of the `Z` axis corresponds to the RGB values of the 
pixel in the `X, Y` coordinate. We package the image frame as a `1D` array of `u8` values. The `u8` values and calculate
the index of the pixel in the `1D` array with the following formula example where the maximum width is `10`, the maximum
height is `5`, and there are `3` layers for the RGB values:

```bash
(3, 480, 853) => (channels, height, width) => (z, y, x)
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="static/coordinates.jpg" alt="Alt text" style="width:480px; height:600px;">
</p>

Here we can see that we can map the `X, Y, Z` coordinates to the `1D` array. To see the sequence of this mapping we can
look at the following testing code:

```rust
fn test_calculate_rgb_index() {

    // This will give x y chunks of 50 and an entire rgb image of 150
    let total_height = 5;
    let total_width = 10;

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&0, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&50, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&100, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(1, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&1, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&51, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&101, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(2, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&2, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&52, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&102, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 1, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&10, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&60, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&110, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 2, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&20, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&70, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&120, &indexes.blue);
}
```

We can see that our mapping function follows the exact same pattern as the reshape function that `numpy` has and this
can be seen in the file `engines/pytorch_train/tests/test_numpy_quality_control.py`.

# Networking

If you just want to use the raw rust binary for ML training, you can directly call the rust binary that loads the images,
and pipe this data into the python pytorch engine as seen in the following example:

```bash
./data_access_rust_bin | python pytorch_engine.py
```

This means we can chunk the data into the stream and thus the ML model to be trained further. We are doing this to
give users flexibility on the size of the RAM memory needed to train the model. For instance, if the user has a
`60GB` folder of images, it is unlikely that they will be able to load all of these images into memory at once 
as depicted in the following:

```bash
[rust (basic)] ===> [1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1] ===> [1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1] ===> [python (ML)]
```

This also gives us a lot of flexibility in the future. For instance, if we need to send the training data over
a network we can easily swap out the `std::io::stdin` with a networking layer like the following:

```bash
[rust (basic)] ===> [TCP (packet)] ===> [TCP (packet)] ===> [python (ML)]
```

We can use the `Command` in a program to coordinate pipes over multiple cores and manage the flow of data.
We can also pipe in the `ffmpeg` command as seen in the following example:

```bash
ffmpeg -i 'srt://192.168.1.345:40052?mode=caller' | ./data_access_rust_bin | python pytorch_engine.py
```

We can map this with the following Rust code:

```rust
use std::process::{Command, Stdio};

fn main() -> std::io::Result<()> {
    // Start the ffmpeg process
    let ffmpeg_output = Command::new("ffmpeg")
        .args(["-i", "srt://192.168.1.345:40052?mode=caller"])
        .stdout(Stdio::piped())
        .spawn()?;

    // Assuming `data_access_rust_bin` is the compiled binary you want to run next
    let rust_binary_output = Command::new("./data_access_rust_bin")
        .stdin(ffmpeg_output.stdout.unwrap()) // Use the output of ffmpeg as input
        .stdout(Stdio::piped())
        .spawn()?;

    // Finally, pass the output of your Rust binary to the Python script
    let python_output = Command::new("python")
        .arg("pytorch_engine.py")
        .stdin(rust_binary_output.stdout.unwrap()) // Use the output of the Rust binary as input
        .output()?;

    // Here you can handle the final output, for example, print it
    println!("Python script output: {}", String::from_utf8_lossy(&python_output.stdout));

    Ok(())
}

```

# Local Test Setup

## SRT listener server in OBS Studio

At this stage, we do not have steady access to Panasonic [AW-UE150](https://eu.connect.panasonic.com/gb/en/products/broadcast-proav/aw-ue150) cameras. Hence, for initial testing purposes, we set up a Secure Reliable Transport (SRT) listener server using OBS Studio. The server URL is 

```powershell
srt://127.0.0.1:9999?mode=listener&timeout=500000&transtype=live
```

- **'127.0.0.1':** IP address of the listener server
- **'9999':** Port of the listener server
- **'timeout=500000':** The listener server waits for connection for 500 s before auto-abort
- **'transtype=live':** Optimised for live streaming

Output resolution is set to 1920 X 1080 with an FPS of 1. The images in the [CAMMA-public/cholect50](https://github.com/CAMMA-public/cholect50) are sourced as an Image Slide Show.

## FFmpeg SRT caller server in Windows Powershell

FFmpeg is installed and used in Windows Powershell. We tested our SRT caller server implementation in Powershell, using the command:

```powershell
ffmpeg -i srt://127.0.0.1:9999?mode=caller -f image2 -vcodec mjpeg -q:v 5 output%03d.jpg
```

- **'127.0.0.1':** Destination IP address the caller calls
- **'9999':** Destination port the caller calls
- **'-f image2':** Set FFmpeg output image format to *image2*
- **'-vcodec mjpeg':** Set FFmpeg output image codec to mjpeg
- **'-q:v 5':** Sets the quality of the jpg images to 5 (2-31)
- **'output%03d.jpg':** Sequentially incrementing file name, e.g. output001.jpg

The above command saves the SRT stream as a sequence of .jpg images. Through this process, we confirm this experimental setup with OBS Studio, FFmpeg, and SRT works in CLI.

Commit message:

Updating the version with new pipelines and error handing (#32)
* adding glue module to enable error handling (#27)

* added batching runner (#28)

* Kings college london integration (#30)

* adding build using binary downloads (#8)

* adding build using binary downloads

* sorting out the build.rs

* updating build.rs for surrealml package

* prepping version for release

* now has target tracking (#10)

* adding check in build.rs for docs.rs

* removing build.rs for main surrealml to ensure that libraries using the core do not need to do anything in their build.rs

* adding machine learning pipelines for bioengineering projects at Kings College London

* Remove integrated_training_runner/run_env/ from tracking

* adding machine learning pipelines for bioengineering projects at Kings College London

* Update FFmpeg data access module and README (#29)

* adding run_env to the gitignore

---------

Co-authored-by: Yang Li <oliverlee2018@163.com>

* bumping the version

---------

Co-authored-by: Sam Hillman <116303632+SHillman836@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Yang Li <oliverlee2018@163.com>

modules/pipelines/data_access/README.md, after:

# Data Access

Here is where we house libraries that handle the reading and writing of data. For now we are merely just reading from jpeg files. However,
we will moved onto support for networking interfaces.

# Python Bindings

Although this library is written in Rust we have the ability to use it in Python. This is done by using the `pyo3` crate. We can install
the library using a `pip install` and pointing to the directory of this readme file. Once the library is installed we can use it in the
following way:

```python
from data_access_layer.data_access_layer import read_rgb_image


def main():
    height = 480
    width = 853
    data = read_rgb_image("./assets/test.jpg", width, height)
    print(f"\n\nThe image has {len(data)} pixels\n\n")
```

# Image Loading

This library handles the reading of jpeg files. It is a simple library that is used to read in the jpeg files and convert them
to a stream of bytes. The loading and conversion of the jpeg files is done in the `data_access/basic/src/images.rs`.
For our images we are handling data in the following outline: 

<p align="center">
  <img src="static/Image_plane.jpg" alt="Alt text" style="width:480px; height:400px;">
</p>

Here we can see that we have three layers of a frame. Each layer of the `Z` axis corresponds to the RGB values of the 
pixel in the `X, Y` coordinate. We package the image frame as a `1D` array of `u8` values. The `u8` values and calculate
the index of the pixel in the `1D` array with the following formula example where the maximum width is `10`, the maximum
height is `5`, and there are `3` layers for the RGB values:

```bash
(3, 480, 853) => (channels, height, width) => (z, y, x)
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="static/coordinates.jpg" alt="Alt text" style="width:480px; height:600px;">
</p>

Here we can see that we can map the `X, Y, Z` coordinates to the `1D` array. To see the sequence of this mapping we can
look at the following testing code:

```rust
fn test_calculate_rgb_index() {

    // This will give x y chunks of 50 and an entire rgb image of 150
    let total_height = 5;
    let total_width = 10;

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&0, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&50, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&100, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(1, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&1, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&51, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&101, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(2, 0, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&2, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&52, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&102, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 1, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&10, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&60, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&110, &indexes.blue);

    let indexes = calculate_rgb_index(0, 2, total_width, total_height);
    assert_eq!(&20, &indexes.red);
    assert_eq!(&70, &indexes.green);
    assert_eq!(&120, &indexes.blue);
}
```

We can see that our mapping function follows the exact same pattern as the reshape function that `numpy` has and this
can be seen in the file `engines/pytorch_train/tests/test_numpy_quality_control.py`.

# Networking

If you just want to use the raw rust binary for ML training, you can directly call the rust binary that loads the images,
and pipe this data into the python pytorch engine as seen in the following example:


```bash
./data_access_rust_bin | python pytorch_engine.py
```

This means we can chunk the data into the stream and thus the ML model to be trained further. We are doing this to
give users flexibility on the size of the RAM memory needed to train the model. For instance, if the user has a
`60GB` folder of images, it is unlikely that they will be able to load all of these images into memory at once 
as depicted in the following:

```bash
[rust (basic)] ===> [1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1] ===> [1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1] ===> [python (ML)]
```

This also gives us a lot of flexibility in the future. For instance, if we need to send the training data over
a network we can easily swap out the `std::io::stdin` with a networking layer like the following:

```bash
[rust (basic)] ===> [TCP (packet)] ===> [TCP (packet)] ===> [python (ML)]
```

We can use the `Command` in a program to coordinate pipes over multiple cores and manage the flow of data.
We can also pipe in the `ffmpeg` command as seen in the following example:

```bash
ffmpeg -i 'srt://192.168.1.345:40052?mode=caller' | ./data_access_rust_bin | python pytorch_engine.py
```

We can map this with the following Rust code:

```rust
use std::process::{Command, Stdio};

fn main() -> std::io::Result<()> {
    // Start the ffmpeg process
    let ffmpeg_output = Command::new("ffmpeg")
        .args(["-i", "srt://192.168.1.345:40052?mode=caller"])
        .stdout(Stdio::piped())
        .spawn()?;

    // Assuming `data_access_rust_bin` is the compiled binary you want to run next
    let rust_binary_output = Command::new("./data_access_rust_bin")
        .stdin(ffmpeg_output.stdout.unwrap()) // Use the output of ffmpeg as input
        .stdout(Stdio::piped())
        .spawn()?;

    // Finally, pass the output of your Rust binary to the Python script
    let python_output = Command::new("python")
        .arg("pytorch_engine.py")
        .stdin(rust_binary_output.stdout.unwrap()) // Use the output of the Rust binary as input
        .output()?;

    // Here you can handle the final output, for example, print it
    println!("Python script output: {}", String::from_utf8_lossy(&python_output.stdout));

    Ok(())
}

```

# Local Test Setup for FFmpeg

## SRT listener server in OBS Studio

At this stage, we do not have steady access to Panasonic [AW-UE150](https://eu.connect.panasonic.com/gb/en/products/broadcast-proav/aw-ue150) cameras. Hence, for initial testing purposes, we set up a Secure Reliable Transport (SRT) listener server using OBS Studio. The server URL is 

```powershell
srt://127.0.0.1:9999?mode=listener&timeout=500000&transtype=live
```

- **'127.0.0.1':** IP address of the listener server
- **'9999':** Port of the listener server
- **'timeout=500000':** The listener server waits for connection for 500 s before auto-abort
- **'transtype=live':** Optimised for live streaming

Output resolution is set to 1920 X 1080 with an FPS of 1. The images in the [CAMMA-public/cholect50](https://github.com/CAMMA-public/cholect50) are sourced as an Image Slide Show.

The listener listens for connection requests from callers. The callers are implemented in `srt_receiver.rs`.

## Download and Install FFmpeg

Download FFmpeg [here](https://www.ffmpeg.org/download.html). Versions are available for Windows, Linux, and Mac OS.

## FFmpeg Documentation

Official documentation of FFmpeg is [here](https://www.ffmpeg.org/documentation.html).
